---
layout: post
title: "Toi+Moi - Gregoire and Star Akademie"
category: Culture
tags: []
---

My daughter attends a French Catholic school and recently the
administration has chosen
[Toi+Moi](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W5zMPmu-EJw) as a theme
song. My daughter has been singing it almost non stop. It is wonderful
to see her so excited and I am enjoying her version of the song. One
evening she wanted to hear the song at home, but we have do not have a
TV so I went to Google and the first link was a link to the Wikipedia
entry for the song. From there I found a link to the official video by
[Gregoire](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kOru9ITtVIg). The song is
simple and catchy and I was finally able to understand some of the
lyrics that had been lost through the school PA system.

The contrast between these two videos could not be more striking. The
original video has ordinary happy people and the song has dynamics and
a nice understated piano part. The album was funded by 347 people
using the music equivalent of Kickstarter and 40 of them were invited
to appear on the video. The video invites everyone to join the
dance and the people are genuinely silly and happy.

The Star Academie video is pure celebrity making machine. Lots of
makeup, glamorous clothing, carefully generated emotion, heavy bass,
zero nuance and predictable choreography. I know that many people like
it, but as a parent I much prefer my child to watch the original
version. The story of a bunch of strangers donating money to
help someone realize their dream is preferable to the un-reality of an
entertainment corporation manufactured competition. 

I do not want to diminish the talents of the performers on Star
Academie. They are chasing their dreams as well. It is unfortunate
that this is being exploited by the producers. This has been the model
for a long time. But the success of Gregoire shows that a new option
is now possible.
