---
layout: post
title: "Book Review: 'Money: Master the Game' by Tony Robbins"
category: Review
tags: [review]
---

After listening to a Tim Ferris podcast with Tony Robbins, I decided
to read his latest book "Money: Master the Game". I was skeptical of
Tony Robbins and his style of motivation speaking. The book has a very
informal speaking style with lots of bold text where you feel Tony is
waving his hands frantically. But the content of the book is superb if
a little long winded. I have read a few books about finance and
investing, but this was the first to take a full life time look at
saving, investing and retiring.

The first part is about saving regularly, starting early and avoiding
excessive fees which are usually hidden. I feel my family is doing
well here, but making saving automatic is a good reminder that saving
is against our basic nature. Money finds ways to get spent.

The next part was making the case that we probably require less money
than we think to sustain the retirement lifestyle we think we
want. There were three levels of lifestyle and each had a worksheet
that required estimates of how much we currently spend. I should have
filled out these worksheets, but I did not because I have this fantasy
of managing our finances with something like hledger which will
provide these answers. When I imagine my retirement, it isn't filled
with high expense activities like travelling the world on a yacht or
having a private jet. Imaging retirement is something I want to do
more of with my family. It will make this kind of planning easier.

The part about investing had some real gems. I was aware of the
importance of asset allocation and having investments that are not
correlated, but the Ray Dalio "all weather" portfolio was
fascinating. It was the first time I had heard of a portfolio that had
so little downside risk with such substantial upside. I always assumed
that any investment with high return required accepting extra
risk. This is an investment strategy that outperformed the "market" or
S&P 500 over decades with almost no loss in capital (maximum loss was
less than 4%). The "secret" is a large allocation of long term bonds
with a small allocation in gold and commodities. The logic that the
economy has four seasons which are the combination of growth and
inflation. Having assets that do well in each "season" has finally
shown me what proper diversification looks like. Since stocks and
bonds are correlated, the classic advice of stock and bond
diversification is problematic. Right now the world economy is in a
period of low inflation and low growth. When it switches (and it will)
to higher inflation and "negative" growth (what a silly term), the
standard advice for asset allocation will cause big problems.

For me the action item from this has been to look very carefully at
the current asset allocation of my portfolio. Right now I am following
a very contrarian style and my largest holding are real return bonds,
short US equities and long commodities like gold and energy. But this
is very short term focused and hopefully a longer focus will expose me
to less risk and volatility.

The next part focused on what Tony referred as the "back of investment
mountain". I have spent a lot of time thinking about how to invest,
but not what to do with that investment. I assumed I would retire at
some point and spend the rest of my retirement managing my pile of
investments. The book again showed me options that I was not aware
of. Apparently there are "hybrid" annuities that provide payments for
life while growing with the equity market but with full capital
preservation! Frankly it sounds too good to be true, but I have made a
note to investigate this further. The possibility of "getting out of
the game" by having an income without having to worry about it is very
appealing. I am skeptical because I don't understand why an insurance
company would take on this much long term risk. At least I think the
premium must be very high to offset the risk, but Tony insists this
plan is now available to all US citizens and I intend to see if I can
find something similar in Canada.

There is a section with interviews of some of the greatest investors
ever like Charles Schwab, Ray Dalio, Warren Buffet, etc. This part was
nice, but did not contain helpful specific advice that wasn't
mentioned in other parts of the book. There was one brief mention of
technical trading which I found strange because it actually goes
against most of the advice in the book. Technical trading assumes the
past stock price behavior can be used to predict the future stock
price. It is true that some people have become very rich that way, but
to me it is too much like gambling without any acknowledgment that the
stock represents a company or group of companies with assets and
revenue and people. On the other hand technical trading increases
volatility which can be useful to contrarian investors like myself.

The last chapter is about the power of giving. I am very motivated to
give my time and energy to my family and friends but the giving of
money is complicated. All things being equal, I would like any
donations to do the most good possible. Even defining what I mean by
good is difficult: less suffering?, more education?, more opportunity?
more equality? less disease? Maybe whatever makes me feel the happiest
is the simplest approach and I need to accept that it will probably
not be the most efficient. If my money isn't making me happy, why even
bother working so hard to accumulate it in the first place? My action
item is to manage our finances better and look for ways to give more
money in ways that will make me and my family happier.

I learned a lot from this book. It has also changed my opinion of Tony
Robbins. The book was a real gift to me and I am planning my future
differently because of it.

Rating: Highly Recommended
