---
layout: post
title: "Book Review: 'So Good They Cannot Ignore You' by Cal Newport"
category: Review
tags: [review]
---

I read regularly thanks to our local Public Library. Recently the Tim
Ferris podcast has expanded my reading list with lots of interesting
books. Luckily the local library has most of these books and hold
waiting lists tend to space the reading out well.

One of the the first Tim Ferris podcasts I listened to was with Derek
Sivers and he mentioned that he maintains a list of book reviews with
ratings on his website. I immediately went to the website and looked
through the highest rated books and setup holds at the library.

The first book I read was "So good they cannot ignore you" by Cal
Newport. This was a short read and the simplicity of its message
resonated with me. The basic message is that our society rewards
people with rare and valuable skills, not people with passion. Many
sources of career advice talk about "following passion", but passion
without skills is not sufficient. If passion drives the building of
valuable skills then it is helpful. The media often portrays having
passion as the most important requirement to getting a great job but
that is harmful because it often leads to confusion and inflated
expectations. Cal calls these valuable skills "career capital" and I
really like that perspective. Career capital is skills and experience
that can be exchanged for career opportunities.

The best books motivate you to make changes in your life. This book
helped me reflect on the career capital that would help me advance my
career. For a software developer that would be submitting patches to
open source projects and writing technical blog posts. I have decided
to commit 10% of my work time to doing this. I haven't been able to
implement it fully, but I am making more of an effort. I have reported
bugs and submitted some small patches. Ideally this will grow to more
and larger patches.

Rating: Highly recommended.
