---
layout: post
title: "Book Review: 'The Time Paradox' by Philip Zimbardo and John Boyd"
category: Review
tags: [review]
---

"The Time Paradox" was another highly rated book by Deric Sivers. The
central message of this book also falls into that category of "obvious
now except it wasn't before". The premise is very ambitious because it
attempts to universally categorize people and their behaviors across
six dimensions. The usual categories of race, religion, age, gender,
education, etc. are flawed, but this book identifies time as the
universal experience of all humans. Every human has a unique
perspective on the past, present and future we all inhabit. The book
breaks the time perspectives into past positive, past negative,
present-hedonistic, present-fatalistic, future and transcendental future.

Past Positive: Views past events in a positive way. Finds the good in
the way things happened.

Past Negative: Views past events in a negative way. Finds the bad in
the way things happened

Present Hedonistic: In the moment and focused on the pleasures of the
now.

Present Fatalistic: In the moment but discounting or ignoring the
risks of present actions

Future: Planning for things that will happen to you later than
now. Delaying gratification and waiting for the larger reward that
will come later.

Transcendental Future: Planning for things that will happen after the
life of that person has ended. This can be spiritual concepts like the
afterlife or non-spiritual concepts like the 10 000 year "Long Now"
foundation or the native American tribes considering the seventh
generation.

Once these dimensions are defined, the book presents a fictional
dialog between six people, each of which represents one time
dimension. The conversation is a little too scripted, but I recognized
people I know and their behaviors in each of the characters. Of course
no real person lives in only one time dimension. We all shift through
the different dimensions in different degrees at different times in
our lives. For example, children are very present oriented and our
society rewards and encourages a future orientation.

The authors then provide the full test that they created to determine
time orientation in their studies. I ended up skipping this section
because I was convinced I already knew that I was too future
oriented. I intend to go back and take the full test and see if there
are any surprises.

The last part of the book explores the dimensions and suggests ways to
deal with and minimize the less desirable orientations like
past-negative and present-fatalistic. It also suggests ways to balance
the positive dimensions like past-positive, present and future with
specific suggestions to help future oriented people live in the moment
and help everyone find ways to reframe negative past events in
positive ways.

The tricky one is the transcendental future orientation. Taking a
perspective that extends past ones own life can be very noble, but can
also lead to a state where choosing to be a suicide bomber is a
rational option.

As stated before, I recognize that I am too future oriented and have
been exploring ways to focus on the present moment more. I am
experimenting with meditation and am trying to find more time for
activities that encourage present awareness: massage, dancing,
music, exercise, cooking and just being silly. I also recognize that
my photography hobby is a great way to encourage a past positive
orientation. The goal is to find a balance because we need all three
dimensions to be happy and feel fulfilled.

Rating: Highly recommended
