---
layout: post
title: "Book Review: 1491 and 1493 by Charles Mann"
category: reviews
tags: []
---

## Introduction

These books changed the way I see and think about our modern world. They
cover what we know today about the American continent before Christopher
Columbus arrived in the "New World" and the many ways the entire world was
changed forever afterwards. Mostly for my own benefit I will list a bunch of
the things I learned and perhaps this will encourage you to read these books
as well.

### Impact of Pathogens

I had heard before about the impact of various pathogens brought over by the
Europeans, but I didn't appreciate the scale. The exact population of the
Americas is impossible to know, but there is lots of evidence for as high as
100 million people. These people had to deal with multiple waves of
influenza, typhoid, small pox, yellow fever, malaria, etc. and over 50 years
this probably killed over 95% of the population.

The consequences of this are mind boggling. The Indians (there doesn't seem
to be a better word for the people that lived in the Americas before
Columbus) did controlled burns of the forests for thousands of years and
this stopped. Without this burning, the ecosystem completely changed. Huge
forests grew, herds of bison formed and the growth may even have been
responsible for the mini ice age in the 1600s due to forests capturing so
much CO2.

All attempted European settlements failed until the Indians were wiped
out. There are so many stories of how ill prepared the settlers were for
life in America. It wasn't until they weren't in direct competition with the
Indians that settlement had a chance of succeeding. Also the weakened Indian
tribes often formed alliances with the settlers in their own
conflicts. These alliances never worked out for the Indians as the Europeans
once established would systematically wipe out the Indians.

### Impact of joining two separate ecosystems

The Americas contained ecosystems completely isolated from the rest of the
world. As the world became a single global ecosystem there were many winners
and losers. America didn't have worms which is one of the reasons the
controlled burns were so critical. Now worms are everywhere and the way they
break down biological material has profound consequences for the native
plants.

The Americas contained three plants that changed the world: tomatoes, corn
and potatoes. It is hard to imagine cuisine today without tomatoes and to
think that something as "universal" as spaghetti and tomato sauce is a very
recent phenomenon. Corn is the backbone of our industrial agriculture
feeding cattle and converted to corn syrup and various other food
additives. The potato alone has been attributed to have allowed the human
population to grow by billions. Impossible to imagine our society without
these plants, not to mention chocolate or tobacco.

### American agriculture

The early settlers often remarked at how healthy the Indians looked. Turns
out the Indians ate a diet of corn, beans and squash that was nutritionally
superior to the European diet of wheat and meat. The Indians didn't have any
pack or domesticated animals. That means all farming was done by hand and all
communications had to be walked. The Europeans mistook that lack of visible
farms as sign that the land was "unused". But without oxen to pull plows
giant farms aren't feasible and the Indians had very different forms of
farming and hunting. Even in the Amazon, there are strange super fertile
regions that contains millions of pottery shards mixed in with the soil. We
still don't understand how this works or was possible.

### Silver from the Andes

After the Incas were defeated and enslaved, the Spanish found a silver mine
in the Andes that had been mined by the Incas. The ore was very pure and
plentiful and soon the silver was moving around the world. It was supposed
to go directly back to Spain to fund various wars.Some enterprising Spanish
sailors realized they could run the silver across the Pacific, trade with
the Chinese for silks and spices, cross the Pacific, Mexico, the Atlantic
and make a fortune. Almost two thirds of the silver went to China and even
the one third to Spain was enough to trigger massive inflation in both
countries. This inflation was the proximate trigger of various regime
changes.

### Rubber

The industrial revolution requires three things: steel, oil and rubber. I
underappreciated the critical role that rubber plays in all the gaskets,
seals and tires that are part of modern machines. The rubber/latex tree is
still a core part of our economy and now grows all over the world. Rubber
tree farms cause all kinds of ecological disasters and the rubber boom of
the late 1800s also caused massive economic upheaval. It is another example
of a natural product for which we haven't been able to make an economical
substitute.

### Slavery

I was not aware of the link between malaria and slavery. Malaria was so
deadly to Europeans and Indians that settlement in the Americas was almost a
death sentence. It was because the Africans had more natural immunity the
malaria that drove much of the Atlantic slave trade. Many African slaves
were in fact prisoners of war between African tribes and so many slaves had
military training. Unsurprisingly many escaped their slavery and formed
"free" communities. One incredible example is a state in modern day Brazil
that survived for almost 90 years. It was strategically placed on a cliff
side with access to water, etc. The populace was trained and they were able
to resist many attacks. It is such an amazing story that I hope it becomes a
movie some day.

## Conclusion

This is just a fraction of the incredible history of the Americas that I am
so grateful to have been able to learn about. Highly recommended.
