---
layout: post
title: "Book Review: How the word is passed by Clint Smith"
category: reviews
tags: []
---

## Introduction

This was a difficult but important book to read. The legacy of slavery and
racism on our society is both overt and subtle. Much of it is ignored and
glossed over but some people are trying to integrate a more historically
accurate interpretation into our institutions and lives.

### Thomas Jefferson

The first part of the book takes place at the farm/plantation of the
founding father Thomas Jefferson. The reality is that slavery was a big part
of all the founding fathers life and business, but Jefferson has some
especially egregious behavior. He split families, tortured slaves and even
had six (!) children with a slave that was his wife's half sister! The
estate is trying very hard to integrate this lesser told story into the
traditional story and it is a difficult task. How can the misery and
suffering of the slaves be reconciled with the fact that they allowed him to
do his incredibly important work?

### Whitney Plantation

This plantation is an independent project of a wealthy retired businessman
to preserve the stories of the slaves that sustained it. It is incredible
work that I am glad is being done. The reality of our history needs to be
preserved and integrated, it cannot be ignored and buried. I hope to be able
to visit this important contribution.

### Modern Day Slavery in Angola

Angola is a maximum security prison in Louisiana that is filled with black
men preforming forced labour for cents on the hour. It is modern day slavery
and it highlights the corruption of the justice system as an overt means of
continuing slavery. All talk of reconciliation is empty as long as this
practice continues. This section was so infuriating.

### Juneteenth and Manhattan

The actual events of Juneteenth were fascinating to me. The end of slavery
in the South after the Civil War was a messy crazy process. I was not aware
that plans to give slaves plots of land was rejected last moment. How
different things might be today if it had happened.

The legacy of slavery in Manhattan is also something not talked about
often. The economics of slavery were embedded throughout all of states and
New York was no exception. Just because it was on the "winning" side doesn't
mean that it doesn't bare any responsibility.

### Blackford Cemetery

The Blackford cemetery is a Confederate cemetery and it is a focal point for
Confederate culture. Is it possible to honor the soldiers without getting
tangled in their implicit support of slavery? Is it possible to celebrate a
culture when that culture justified a war to maintain slavery? It is a
similar situation to post war Germany where everyone has to grapple with the
fact that normal people enabled the slaughter of millions of people. What I
experienced is that Germans have reframed the teaching of the history in
terms of "Never Again", i.e. we must teach this to ensure that it can never
happen again. Unfortunately I don't see this kind of hard work being done in
the US.

## Conclusion

I don't think we will be able to address the legacy of slavery and racism
without a clear acknowledgment and acceptance of the past. I really
appreciated the way this book presented the historical blind spots of US
history. Highly recommended.
