---
layout: post
title: "Book reviews"
category: Review
tags: [review]
---

I try to read regularly and recently after listening to the Tim
Ferris podcast my reading list has expanded more quickly than I have
time to read. Luckily the local library has most of these books and
hold waiting lists tend to space the reading out well.

One of the the first Tim Ferris podcasts I listened to was with Derek
Sivers and he mentioned that he maintains a list of book reviews with
ratings on his website. I immediately went to the website and looked
through the highest rated books and setup holds at the library.

The first book I read was "So good they cannot ignore
you" by Cal Newport. This was a short read and the simplicity of its
message resonated with me. The basic message is that our society
rewards having rare and valuable skills, not passion. Many sources
talk about "following passion", but passion without skills is not
sufficient. If passion drives the building of valuable skills then it
is helpful, but the media often portrays having passion as all that is
required to get a great job and that is harmful and often leads to
confusion and inflated expectations. Cal calls these valuable skills
"career capital" and I really like that perspective. Career capital is
something that can be exchanged for career opportunities.

This matches closely to the things that Seth Godin writes about being
a "linchpin". It helped me reflect on what would be the career capital
that would help me improve my career. For me that would be submitting
patches to open source projects and writing technical blog posts. I
have decided to commit 10% of my work time to doing this. I haven't
been able to implement it fully, but I am making more of an effort. I
have reported bugs and submitted some small patches. Ideally this will
grow to more and larger patches.

The next book was "The War of Art" by Steven Pressfield. I found the
format strange because it felt like a collection of short blog
posts. The writing was very repetitive and with all the other reading
I have done of Seth Godin and many blogs the message didn't feel new
or motivating. I kept reading hoping for some insight or wording but I
finished the book feeling disappointed.

After listening to a Tim Ferris podcast with Tony Robbins, I decided
to read his latest book "Money: Master the Game". I was skeptical of
Tony Robbins and his style of motivation speaking. The book has a very
informal speaking style with lots of bold text where you feel Tony is
waving his hands frantically. But the content of the book is superb if
a little long winded. I have read a few books about finance and
investing, but this was the first to take a full life time look at
saving, investing and retiring.

The first part is about saving regularly, starting early and avoiding
excessive fees which are usually hidden. I feel my family is doing
well here, but making saving automatic is a good reminder that saving
is against our basic nature. Money finds ways to get spent.

The next part was making the case that we probably require less money
that we think to sustain the retirement lifestyle we think we
want. There were three levels of lifestyle and each had a worksheet
that required estimates of how much we currently spend. I should have
filled out these worksheets, but I did not because I have this fantasy
of managing our finances with something like hledger which will
provide these answers. When I imagine my retirement, it isn't filled
with high expense activities like travelling the world on a yacht or
having a private jet. Imaging retirement is something I want to do
more of with my family. It will make this kind of planning easier.

The part about investing had some real gems. I was aware of the
importance of asset allocation and having investments that are not
correlated, but the Ray Dalio "all weather" portfolio was
fascinating. It was the first time I had heard of a portfolio that had
so little downside with such substantial upside. I always assumed that
any investment with high return required accepting extra risk. Here
was an investment strategy that outperformed the "market" or S&P 500
over decades with almost no loss in capital (maximum loss was less
than 4%). The "secret" is a large allocation of long term bonds with a
small allocation in gold and commodities. The logic that the economy
has four seasons which are the combination of growth and
inflation. Having assets that do well in each "season" has finally
shown me what proper diversification looks like. Since stocks and
bonds are correlated, the classic advice of stock and bond
diversification is problematic. Right now the world economy is in a
period of low inflation and low growth. When it switches (and it will)
to higher inflation and "negative" growth (what a silly term), the
standard advice for asset allocation will cause big problems.

For me the action item from this has been to look very carefully at
the current asset allocation of my portfolio. Right now I am following
a very contrition style and my largest holding are real return bonds,
short US equities and long commodities like gold and energy. But this
is very short term focused and hopefully a longer focus will expose me
to less risk and volatility.

The next part focused on what Tony referred as the "back of investment
mountain". I have spent a lot of time thinking about how to invest,
but not what to do with that investment. I assumed I would retire at
some point and spend the rest of my retirement managing my pile of
investments. The book again showed me options that I was not aware
of. Apparently there are "hybrid" annuities that provide payments for
life while growing with the equity market but with full capital
preservation! Frankly it sounds too good to be true, but I have made a
note to investigate this further. The possibility of "getting out of
the game" by having an income without having to worry about it is very
appealing. I am skeptical because I don't understand why an insurance
company would take on this much long term risk. At least I think the
premium must be very high to offset the risk, but Tony insists this
plan is now available to all US citizens and I intend to see if I can
find something similar in Canada.

There is a section with interviews of some of the greatest investors
ever like Charles Schwab, Ray Dalio, Warren Buffet, etc. This part was
nice, but did not contain helpful specific advice that wasn't
mentioned in other parts of the book. There was one brief mention of
technical trading which I found strange because it actually goes
against most of the advice in the book. Technical trading assumes the
past stock price behavior can be used to predict the future stock
price. It is true that some people have become very rich that way, but
to me it is too much like gambling without any acknowledgment that the
stock represents a company or group of companies with assets and
revenue and people. On the other hand technical trading increases
volatility which can be useful to contrarian investors like myself.

The last chapter is about the power of giving. I am very motivated to
give my time and energy to my family and friends but the giving of
money is complicated. All things being equal, I would like any
donations to do the most good possible. Even defining what I mean by
good is difficult: less suffering?, more education?, more opportunity?
more equality? less disease? Maybe whatever makes me feel the happiest
is the simplest and accept that it will probably not be the most
efficient. But if my money isn't making me happy, why even bother in
the first place? My action item is to manage our finances better and
look for ways to give more money in ways that will make me feel
good.

I highly recommend this book as there is a lot to be learned. It has
also changed my opinion of Tony Robbins. The book was a real gift to
me and I am planning my future differently because of it.

"The Time Paradox" was another highly rated book by Deric Sivers. The
central message of this book also falls into that category of "obvious
now except it wasn't before". The premise is very ambitious because it
attempts to universally categorize people and their behaviors across
six dimensions. The usual categories of race, religion, age, gender,
education, etc. are flawed, but this book identifies time as the
universal experience of all humans. Every human has a unique
perspective on the past, present and future we all inhabit. The book
breaks the time perspectives into past positive, past negative,
present, present-fatalistic, future and transcendental future.

Past Positive: Views past events in a positive way. Finds the good in
the way things happened.

Past Negative: Views past events in a negative way. Finds the bad in
the way things happened

Present: In the moment and fully aware and committed to what is
happening now.

Present Fatalistic: In the moment but discounting or ignoring the
risks of present actions

Future: Planning for things that will happen to you later than
now. Delaying gratification and waiting for the larger reward that
will come later.

Transcendental Future: Planning for things that will happen after the
life of that person has ended. This can be spiritual concepts like the
afterlife or non-spiritual concepts like the 10 000 year "Long Now"
foundation or the native American tribes considering the seventh
generation.

Once these dimensions are defined, the book presents a fictional
dialog between six people, each of which represents one time
dimension. The conversation is a little too scripted, but I recognized
people I know and their behaviors in each of the characters. Of course
it is rare that a person lives in only one time dimension, so we all
move through the different dimensions at different times in our
lives. Children are very present oriented and our society rewards and
encourages a future orientation.

The authors then provide the full test that they created to determine
time orientation in their studies. I ended up skipping this section
because I was convinced I already knew that I was too future
oriented. I intend to go back and take the full test and see if there
are any surprises.

The last part of the book explores the dimensions and suggests ways to
deal with and minimize the less desirable orientations like
past-negative and present-fatalistic. It also suggests ways to balance
the positive dimensions like past-postive, present and future with
specific suggestions to help future oriented people live in the moment
and help everyone find ways to reframe negative past events in
positive ways.

The tricky one is the transcendental future orientation. Taking a
perspective that extends past ones own life can be very noble, but can
also lead to a state where choosing to be a suicide bomber is a
rational option.

As stated before, I recognize that I am too future oriented and have
been exploring ways to focus on the present moment more. I am
experimenting with meditation and am trying to find more time for
activities that encourage present awareness: massage, dancing,
music, exercise, cooking and just being silly. I also recognize that
my photography hobby is a great way to encourage a past positive
orientation. The goal is to find a balance because we need all three
dimensions to be happy and feel fulfilled.

